Round 1 of comments on GZ SFMS paper; August 2014
-------------------------------------------------------------------

Ramin Skibba

- In my personal opinion, the term "main sequence" is kind of a misnomer, but
  it's popular now.  I think "star-forming sequence" would be sufficient, but
  if you want to include the "main" in there, I'll understand and that's fine
      with me.

    I'd like to stick with star-forming main sequence, but could be talked out
    of it if there are multiple votes for the other term.

    Stats: 235 papers on ADS from 2009-2014 with "star forming sequence" 267
    papers on ADS from 2009-2014 with "star forming main sequence"

- I know Kevin might be a fan of the Peng et al. papers, but in my opinion,
  they weren't very impressive, and the terms "mass quenching" and "environment
  quenching" don't really explain much and have only served to muddle the
  field.  There are better papers on the subject out there, and a particularly
  good one is De Lucia et al. (2012, MNRAS, 423, 1277).

    Ask Ramin to write a sentence or two on this incorporating the De Lucia et
    al. results (or any other relevant ones).

- You should state somewhere (e.g., at the end of the intro.) what your assumed
  values of Omega_m and h are, what the assumed IMF is, etc.

    Updated cosmology. Initial mass function is in the MPA-JHU models, but I
    believe it uses the Kroupa (2001) universal IMF (rather than the Chabrier).

- Since you're using the updated Brinchmann et al. SFRs (right?), you should
  mention and cite Salim et al. (2007, ApJS, 173, 267), since the results in
  that paper motivated those updates.

    OK. 

- Have you tested whether your results change at all if you use photometrically
  calibrated stellar masses rather than the Kauffmann et al. spectroscopic
  ones?  It's not necessary for the paper, but I was just curious.

    Stellar masses in the MPA-JHU catalog actually are based on photometry, not
    spectroscopy according to the catalog description
    (http://www.mpa-garching.mpg.de/SDSS/DR7/Data/stellarmass.html). Is there a
    published separate catalog for spectroscopic masses from Kauffmann?

- Is it possible to estimate errors on the parameters in Table 1?  If so, it's
  worth going through the effort of calculating them and including them (and
  expanding the table to both columns, if necessary).

    The elements given are the formal errors; however, there must be a better
    way to do this. The formal least-squares errors seem way too small. Maybe
    resampling many times with subsets and looking at the dispersion in the
    fits for the sample?

- Since you have so few galaxies with 4 or 5+ spiral arms, it might be better
  to remove those panels from Fig. 1 and only briefly discuss them in the text.
  It's up to you though.

    I've changed Figure 1; now I weight the galaxies with the GZ probability
    for each spiral arm and then perform the same fits, like I did for the
        spiral arm tightnesses. I've also tried doing all the analysis by using
        the plurality morphology for each category, rather than the secure
        examples I originally used. The results are broadly in agreement for
        all the methods I've tried.

- It might improve the discussion to add something about environmental (or DM
  halo) dependencies, maybe in the context of the results in my and Steven's GZ
  papers.  If you agree, I'd be happy to help write that.

    Much appreciated.

- What do you mean when you say that mergers and green peas may be "driven"
  above the SFMS?  Do you mean that mergers with gas-rich galaxies can trigger
  starbursts and boost the galaxies' SFRs?  That sounds reasonable to me.  The
  offset of nearly 0.3 dex in Fig. 4 is a neat result.

    Yep - mass doesn't increase significantly, but relative amount of star
    formation (for short time periods) do. It is a neat result - already known,
    I think, but I haven't seen it in quite this context before. Have reworded
    the abstract to remove the word "driven", though.

- By the way, in that context, check out the lower panel of Fig. 4 of Skibba et
  al. (2009): we saw that close pairs of GZ galaxies definitely have much
  higher P_mg and sSFR than average.

    Nice - cited.

-------------------------------------------------------------------

Ivy Wong

Out of curiousity, I'd be interested to know the "fracdev" distribution for
each class of your objects even though you have selected out the early-types.
Willett et al 2013 does show the bulge-disk ratio to be an important driver so
I'm wondering if the spirals without clear arms are also those with bigger B/D
ratios...

    Interesting - I plotted both the raw and cumulative distributions of
    fracdev (in r-band) for all the subsamples of galaxies. In this case, I
    defined each morphological category as the plurality answer. Among spiral
    arm multiplicities, 1- and 2-armed spirals have slightly lower B/D
    fractions than the rest of the star-forming sample, while the remaining
    spirals, including those with unclear arms, do have higher B/D ratios. The
    difference is stronger for the pitch angle of the spiral arms; loose
    spirals have the lowest B/D ratios, while tight spirals have higher ones --
    that's actually what I would expect, since looser-wound arms also just
    means there's more material in the disk. Karen previously found an increase
    in bar fraction with rising fracdeV, which I also see. Mergers have the
    lowest B/D ratio of the sample; perhaps also to be expected since the tidal
    disk is being stripped. FracdeV measurements are much harder to interpret
    in this case where the disk emission has a high likelihood of being
    radially asymmetric.

I reckon that the SFR is driven by the disk potential and the disk stability so
I think that your findings make sense.  How do your bar results compare to
those that Karen has been publishing?  Didn't she find that redder galaxies are
more likely to host bars?

    That's right - I think the results are in agreement, although I'm not
    looking in detail at color (I think multiple GZ2 papers have dealt with
    this). So if redder (and more massive) galaxies are more likely to host
    bars, then one would expect barred galaxies to have lower levels of star
    formation at a given mass. I actually don't see that in the dataset, which
    is surprising. I've looked at barred vs. unbarred disks more closely,
    including limiting the sample to certain identifications (90% vote
    fractions). There is a slight preference for high mass barred galaxies to
    fall below the SFMS, but it's not a strong effect. I'd like to discuss that
    more with you and Karen, because I agree it's puzzling. 

-------------------------------------------------------------------

Tom Melvin

It is a very interesting result, suggesting that a galaxy is able to self
regulate so that it generally falls on the SFMS, unless it is in the process of
merging. I remember in my masters thesis exploring the SFRs of mergers in
galaxy clusters in the Millennium Simulations, and the idea there was that they
increased by at least an order of magnitude, much greater than the observations
of galaxy mergers in clusters. This seems to be a much more conclusive piece of
work to suggest the same thing, that galaxy simulations don't quite get the
properties of merging galaxies right.

    Exactly - although of course with the caveat that we're not focusing here
    on cluster environments. Splitting by local density, or central vs.
    satellites, or something similar would be good for a follow-up
    investigation.

I think in Figure 1 it could be worth grouping galaxies with 4 and 5 spiral
arms together maybe? I'd say add the unknown arms too, but they could be
completely different animals! Either way, the main point of no deviation from
the SFMS would stand (just a few more numbers in a sample!).

    I've changed Figure 1 now, since both you and several others have pointed
    out the very limited use of a linear fit to just a few points. Now the
    spiral galaxies are overplotted as contours; each galaxy is now weighted by
    the vote fraction for arm multiplicity. Results are essentially the same as
    before, with tight fits for all multiplicities. The 1-armed spiral increase
    is not as prominent using this technique, though. 

    I thought about grouping the 4 and 5 arms as well, but I don't know if I
    would have a good reason for drawing the line there (eg, why not 3, 4, and
    5 as well).

I would be interested to see what the relationships for 1 armed spirals and
merging galaxies would look like for barred and unbarred versions of the two.
As there is the idea that mergers can induce bars, do merging disk galaxies
with bars deviate further from the SFMS or not? I'm not sure of the numbers for
each of the samples once plit into barred and unbarred, but it will probably be
dependent of mass ratios (as you use in Fig 4), as 1-to-1 mergers would
probably have no bars!

    The numbers aren't super high, mostly due to the fact that both mergers and
    1-armed spirals are rare. I've made a version of the plot looking at both
    splits. There's no indication for the 1-armed spirals that they behave
    differently on the SFMS. Same goes for mergers. The mass ratio question is
    interesting; barred mergers are certainly rare, but major mergers not
    exclusively so. There's only a single galaxy in the whole sample that is
    really, truly definitively barred (42 votes) and has a mass ratio of less
    than 2:1, and only a couple more with reasonable vote fractions and high
    total numbers. 
    
    It doesn't stand out too strongly in the SFMS plot, but investigating these
    rare barred mergers as individual objects would be really interesting. See
    attached:

    barred_major_merger1.html barred_major_merger2.html
    barred_major_merger3.html

Not sure if this is something worth doing, but as you have looked at bars,
would it be worth looking at bulges in this way too? I know Brooke did
something similar (or completely identical, I can't quite remember!) with
bulgeless disks. 

    I've looked at this a couple different ways, both by B/D (with fracdeV as
    the proxy, by Ivy's suggestion) and now at the bulge dominance. There's
    absolutely a strong mass dependence on bulge dominance, especially for
    robustly classified galaxies; median mass goes from roughly 10^8 for
    bulgeless galaxies up to 10^10.5 for obvious bulge-dominated galaxies.
    There's more scatter at the lower masses, but the trend is just to move
    them along the sequence, it seems - not to shift it either above or below. 

-------------------------------------------------------------------

Bob Nichol

My first science question regards dust/reddening and inclination angle on the
sky. Could you check for the subset of near face-on spirals (maybe not all
subclasses but ones where you have the numbers)

    Good question, Bob - I hadn't looked at that before. I sorted the
    morphology bins for confirmed spirals/disks by the plurality vote. This
    means each galaxy has one answer for the arms winding, arms number, and bar
    questions (regardless of what the actual value of the vote fraction is).
    That means there's at least a couple hundred galaxies in each category. 

    Formal two-sided KS tests between the various morphologies actually say
    that all morphological categories have different distributions of
    inclination angles when compared to their parent samples. This belies the
    "by-eye" check for many cases, especially two-armed spirals. I wonder if a
    few outliers are making the KS test statistic more sensitive than it should
    be; the mean and spread match up well. 

    The biggest difference is in the relative pitch angle of the galaxies (arms
    winding). Loosely-wound spiral arms have the lowest A/B ratio, indicating a
    higher inclination angle. There's a clear trend up to "tightly"-wound arms,
    which have the highest inclination angles for the sample. This could be
    explained by simple geometry - as you incline the disk, the angle (apparent
    spacing) between arms increases. We could potentially try to work out the
    true distribution of pitch angles by deprojecting the galaxies by the
    appropriate axis ratio, and then seeing if the morphological
    sub-populations are still different. 

    Barred and unbarred galaxies have mostly similar inclination angles,
    although barred galaxies are slightly more likely to be inclined. Fits with
    Karen's finding of redder spirals (although that's mostly not due to
    inclination).  

    So what do you think, Bob - anything about these results that might
    influence the general conclusions about the SFMS and disk morphology?

    Stats:
    
        exp A/B: 
        
        All star-forming galaxies (N =  40370): mean = 0.58 +- 0.22
        All         disk galaxies (N =  12310): mean = 0.66 +- 0.17
        All       spiral galaxies (N =   7866): mean = 0.67 +- 0.17
        
        Arms number: 
        	           1 arms (N =    244): mean = 0.71 +- 0.15; KS-prob from all spirals = 0.000003
        	           2 arms (N =   4752): mean = 0.65 +- 0.17; KS-prob from all spirals = 0.000001
        	           3 arms (N =    857): mean = 0.73 +- 0.15; KS-prob from all spirals = 0.000000
        	           4 arms (N =    218): mean = 0.74 +- 0.15; KS-prob from all spirals = 0.000001
        	 more_than_4 arms (N =    210): mean = 0.74 +- 0.16; KS-prob from all spirals = 0.000026
        	   cant_tell arms (N =   1618): mean = 0.66 +- 0.18; KS-prob from all spirals = 0.015004
        
        Arms winding: 
        	       tight arms (N =   2702): mean = 0.71 +- 0.17; KS-prob from all spirals = 0.000000
        	      medium arms (N =   3831): mean = 0.67 +- 0.17; KS-prob from all spirals = 0.048706
        	       loose arms (N =   1366): mean = 0.58 +- 0.16; KS-prob from all spirals = 0.000000
        
        Bars: 
                     Barred   (N =   3411): mean = 0.62 +- 0.16; KS-prob from all disks = 0.000000
                     Unbarred (N =   8899): mean = 0.68 +- 0.17; KS-prob from all disks = 0.000000
    
-------------------------------------------------------------------

Karen Masters

    Attached as separate annotated PDF (Willett_SFMS_morph1_klmcomments.pdf)

-------------------------------------------------------------------

Sugata Kaviraj

---------
 
ABSTRACT
 
'significant reduction over the increase'
 
I am not sure this is statement is altogether correct. At z>1 the enhacement in
star formation in mergers can actually be milder because the background level
of star formation in galaxies is already very high. Mergers tend to
proprtionally enhance SF more at lower redshifts. see:
http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2013MNRAS.429L..40K

    In that case, the wording may be somewhat off, but it emphasizes why these
    results are unusual, then (since they do focus on low-redshift galaxies).
    I've added a reference to your paper in the discussion. 
 
----
 
I found the last two sentences in the abstract a bit cryptic e.g. 'quenching
relation', 'filling factor of the disk', 'strong dynamical forcing'. 

    Have modified a couple of the above terms. 
 
----
 
RESULTS
 
Would be good to show some examples of spirals with different numbers of arms
so readers can get a feel for what types of systems are being discussed. This
would be especially important for the 1-armed spirals which might be tidal
tails (as you say in the text) and 3+ armed spirals which are rare and readers
might wonder what these systems actually look like. It would also help the
discussion in the second last para of page 2 where you discuss the morphology
of galaxies with an uncertain number of spirals arms and how that affects their
position on the SF main sequence. Some example images might make it easier for
the reader to follow the explanation in this para.

    It's a good suggestion, although there's a big potential range here. Seems
    potentially more suited for an Appendix figure?
 
----
 
DISCUSSION
 
'Thus while the overall bulge strength does affect the position of a galaxy on
the SFMS (Martig et al. 2009; Lang et al. 2014; Omand et al. 2014), the
structure of the disk itself does not.'
 
I looked at bulge quenching in some detail in a recent paper. Would you mind
adding it to this list?
 
http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2014MNRAS.440.2944K

    Certainly!
 
----
 
'This increase in star formation for mergers does show a strong evolution in
redshift out to at least 1:5 < z < 2:5, likely due to the higher gas
fractionsinvolved (Daddi et al. 2010; Rodighiero et al. 2011).'
 
Might want to be a bit careful here. Rodighiero et al. 2011's 'starbursts' i.e.
those that lie above the SF main sequence are not necesarily mergers (in fact a
lot of them are probably not). They didnt do any morphological analysis but
simply assumed that these starbursts were mergers. When one does things
morphologically, most of the mergers share the same parameter space as normal
starbursts at these redshifts e.g.
http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2013MNRAS.429L..40K

    Interesting - thanks. I've added a reference to Kaviraj+13 in that
    paragraph, but please let me know if you have suggestions for how to
    further reword it. 
 
----
 
'Almost all simulations of galaxy mergers predict a steep increase in the star
formation rate during both firrst passage and final coalescence (eg, Hopkins et
al. 2008). The magnitude of this increase often depends on the details of the
simulation, but can range from a factor of 10 to 100. In the low-redshift
universe sampled by SDSS and Galaxy Zoo, we find no evidence for an enhancement
of such magnitude. This in turn suggests that the current generation of galaxy
merger simulations misses critical feedback mechanisms that prevent runaway
peaks in star formation rates during mergers.'
 
This is very true (although note that the simulations do often involve feedback
and still get it wrong!). I looked at this issue from an observational
viewpoint using deep images from the Stripe 82 to pick out mergers in spiral
galaxies (so a similar population to what you are studying here):
 
http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2014MNRAS.440.2944K
 
The observationally determined star formation enchancements (at final
coalescence where the enhancements are likely to peak) are between a factor of
2 and 6, consistent with your results. I think its better to mention these
observational results rather than (or in addition to) simulations which depend
critically on the setup used (as you say in the text).

    Now mentioned.
 
----
 
GENERAL STUFF
 
Do the results remain the same if one looked at specific SFR vs stellar mass
instead of stellar mass? Looking at the position of the galaxies in Figure 1, I
am guessing there is no change. A sentence saying this somewhere in the results
section would be useful in case the referee queries it.

    I've made versions of all the plots with sSFR. There's no significant
    change in the results; the largest effect I see is that 5+ armed spirals (a
    rare population) have lower than normal sSFR. I might have expected that to
    be higher, actually, which is odd - but I think we can add a sentence
    saying results do not significantly change when using sSFR. 

    Attached: sSFR plots.

Edmond Cheung

Nice stuff, your results do seem to indicate that structure (aside from the
bulge) don't seem to affect a star-forming galaxy's star formation rate, which
is something that I think I need to think more upon to appreciate fully.

    I don't know that I've appreciated it fully myself. If it holds up though,
    I think it's interesting. Although disappointing at the same time, because
    it means lots of astronomers who focus on galactic evolution will assume
    they don't need Galaxy Zoo and all the detailed disk structure we provide!

But here is some shameless plugging, if you don't mind, it would be nice if you
could also cite my Galaxy Zoo bar work (Cheung et al. 2013;
http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2013ApJ...779..162C) when you mention at the end
of section 3 that the fraction of bars is correlated with stellar mass, i.e.,
in the reference with Masters et al. 2011.

    No problem - added!

It would also be great if you could cite my paper on the correlation between
quenching and central surface mass density (Cheung et al. 2012;
http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2012ApJ...760..131C) when you mention that bulge
strength affect the position of a galaxy on the SFMS in section 4. My 2012
paper showed that the central density, which is essentially the bulge mass
since 1 kpc is the typical half-light radii of stellar bulges, is the most
correlated parameter to a galaxy's star formation state. Fang et al. 2013 is a
complimentary paper that used SDSS data, that would be nice if you could cite
that too (http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2013ApJ...776...63F).

    Thanks very much - didn't know about the Fang+13 paper, but that looks
    interesting. Have added both references. 

-------------------------------------------------------------------

Brooke Simmons

My comments on the paper attached. Really nice paper, argued well. I have some
questions about some of the stuff we talked about at the telecon today, but I
think it can wait until the next version. But I will say that if the presence
of lenticulars makes a difference doesn't that imply that the
weighted-by-pvalue plots will have different fits than the pvalue-threshold
plots? Lenticulars often have really middle-of-the-road vote percentages, and
so they get medium weight, but then there are a lot of them, so they have a
major effect. So if you're looking at a feature that might be contaminated by
lenticulars, that's an issue. I'm just not sure any of these different axes
are. :)

    I don't think so - lenticulars were mostly in the context of Melanie's
    paper on bars/AGN, although the same arguments could apply here. From NA10,
    lenticulars are between ~20% of the total numbers of late-type galaxies. If
    that scales to GZ2, then you're right - it's a lot. 

    You're right - looking at the fits for spiral number and pitch angle
    (mostly the former), the pvalue-weighted fits are closer to the overall
    population than the thresholded values are. That's the direction we'd
    expect for the middle-of-the-road lenticulars. I don't know if it can be
    corrected in GZ2, since we don't reliably identify lenticulars.

I think the confusion I express about the lack of dependence on bars is related
to the selection of only star-forming galaxies, but I'm not completely sure. I
seem to recall that a lot of the red spirals actually *are* still star-forming,
but just not that strongly. But perhaps it's weak enough that red spirals (or
green ones) don't make the cut?

    A large fraction of the red spirals do fall in the standard star-forming
    regime on the BPT diagram; actually slightly more than blue spirals, if I'm
    interpreting Figs. 12-13 in Masters+10 correctly. One of the inferences is
    that they must have had relatively recent star formation simply because the
    spiral arms exist; they would have presumably faded on ~Gyr timescales
    after cessation of star formation.

Anyway, if that's the case I think you should make it clearer that the
selection of only star-forming galaxies removes X% of various types of disk
galaxies, and therefore this in some cases changes the conclusions from what
you might expect...

    Good suggestion. Selection of star forming galaxies removes (morph. by plurality vote):

    All galaxies: 148588 in full,  49097 in SF sample. Cut removes  99491 (67.0 percent)
    All    disks:  34260 in full,  15045 in SF sample. Cut removes  19215 (56.1 percent)
    
    Morph:               t11_arms_number_a31_1 --    528 in full,    289 in SF sample. Cut removes    239 (45.3 percent)
    Morph:               t11_arms_number_a32_2 --  12455 in full,   5641 in SF sample. Cut removes   6814 (54.7 percent)
    Morph:               t11_arms_number_a33_3 --   2219 in full,    997 in SF sample. Cut removes   1222 (55.1 percent)
    Morph:               t11_arms_number_a34_4 --    723 in full,    285 in SF sample. Cut removes    438 (60.6 percent)
    Morph:     t11_arms_number_a36_more_than_4 --    725 in full,    289 in SF sample. Cut removes    436 (60.1 percent)
    Morph:       t11_arms_number_a37_cant_tell --   4644 in full,   2017 in SF sample. Cut removes   2627 (56.6 percent)
    
    Morph:          t10_arms_winding_a28_tight --   8685 in full,   3255 in SF sample. Cut removes   5430 (62.5 percent)
    Morph:         t10_arms_winding_a29_medium --   9678 in full,   4578 in SF sample. Cut removes   5100 (52.7 percent)
    Morph:          t10_arms_winding_a30_loose --   2883 in full,   1672 in SF sample. Cut removes   1211 (42.0 percent)
    
    Morph:                              barred --  10719 in full,   4211 in SF sample. Cut removes   6508 (60.7 percent)
    Morph:                            unbarred --  23541 in full,  10834 in SF sample. Cut removes  12707 (54.0 percent)

Attached: annotated PDF by Brooke.

-------------------------------------------------------------------


MY NOTES:

    - determine what the largest volume-limited sample would be in SDSS/GZ2
    - how low do I need to go to hit M~10**9?
    - compare previous plots and ones with volume limited samples
    - fix the fits to total sample; obviously wrong in new plots
    - update table with fits
    - make table with missing SF galaxies


